Chapter 6. Heapsort
===================

This chapter introduces the Heapsort algorithm.
Like merge sort, but unlike insertion sort, heapsort's running time is _O_(_n_ lg _n_).
Like insertion sort, but unlike merge sort, heapsort sorts in-place.

Heapsort also introduces a design technique: using data structures. 
That data structure being a Heap. As a result, the Heap data structure is also defined in this chapter.


## (Binary) Heap
>The (binary) heap data structure is an array object that we can view as a nearly complete binary tree. (...) 
The tree is completely filled on all levels except possibly the lowest, which is filled from the left up to a point.
An array _A_ that represents a heap is an object with two attributes: _A.length_, which (as usual) gives the number of elements in the array, 
and _A.heap-size_, which represents how many elements in the heap are stored within array _A_. (...)
The root of the tree is _A_\[1], and given the index _i_ of a node, we can easily compute the indices of its parent, left child, and right child.

**Pseudocode**:
>Parent(_i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** ⌊_i_/2⌋  
    
>Left(_i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** 2*_i_  
    
>Right(_i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** 2*_i_ + 1  

>Max-Heapify(_A_, _i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _l_ = Left(_i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _r_ = right(_i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _l_ ≤ _A.heap-size_ and _A_\[_l_] > _A_\[_i_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _largest_ = _l_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **else** 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _largest_ = _i_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _r_ ≤ _A.heap-size_ and _A_\[_r_] > _A_\[_largest_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _largest_ = _r_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _largest_ ≠ _i_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        exchange _A_\[_i_] with _A_\[_largest_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        Max-Heapify(_A_, _largest_)  

>Build-Max-Heap(_A_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _A_._heap-size_ = _A_._length_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _i_ = ⌊_A_._length_ / 2⌋ **downto** 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        Max-Heapify(_A_, 1)  


**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter06/HeapDataStructure.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter06/HeapDataStructureTest.kt).


## Heapsort

**Input**: A sequence of _n_ numbers \<_a_<sub>1</sub>, _a_<sub>2</sub>, ..., _a_<sub>n</sub>\>.

**Output**: A permutation (reordering) \<_a'_<sub>1</sub>, _a'_<sub>2</sub>, ..., _a'_<sub>_n_</sub>\> of the input sequence such that _a'_<sub>1</sub> ≤ _a'_<sub>2</sub> ≤ ... ≤ _a'_<sub>_n_</sub>.

**Pseudocode**:
>Heapsort(_A_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    Build-Max-Heap(_A_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _i_ = _A.length_ **downto** 2  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        exchange _A_\[1] with _A_\[_i_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _A.heap-size_ = _A.heap-size_ - 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        Max-Heapify(_A_, _i_)  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter06/Heapsort.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter06/HeapsortTest.kt).


## Priority queue

Heaps have many more uses than just the Heapsort. One of them is the implementation of priority queues.
Here the Heap data structure is extended with some extra functions, so it can work as a Max-priority queue

**Pseudocode**:
>Heap-Maximum(_A_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _A_\[1]  

>Heap-Extract-Max(_A_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _A.heap-size_ < 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **error** "heap underflow"  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _max_= _A_\[1]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _A_\[1] = _A_\[_A.heap-size_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _A.heap-size_ = _A.heap-size_ - 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    Max-Heapify(_A_, 1)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _max_  

>Heap-Increase-Key(_A_, _i_, _key_)   
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _key_ < _A_\[_i_]   
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **error** "new key is smaller than current key"  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _A_\[_i_] = _key_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **while** _i_  > 1 and _A_\[Parent(_i_)] < _A_\[_i_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        exchange _A_\[_i_] with _A_\[Parent(_i_)]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _i_ = Parent(_i_)  

>Max-Heap-Insert(_A_, _key_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _A.heap-size_ = _A.heap-size_ + 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _A_\[_A.heap-size] = -∞  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    Heap-Increase-Key(_A_, _A.heap-size_, _key_)  

***In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter06/HeapDataStructure.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter06/HeapDataStructureTest.kt).

