Chapter 7. Quicksort
====================

This chapter introduces the Quicksort algorithm.
Although having a worst-case running time of _θ_(_n<sup>2</sup>_), it is still one of the best practical choices for sorting, as it is remarkably efficient on the average. 
Its expected running time is  _θ_(_n_ lg _n_), and the constant factors hidden in it are quite small. 
It also has the advantage of sorting in place.

### Quicksort

Like merge sort, quicksort applies a divide-and-conquer strategy.
Below is the three-step divide-and-conquer process for sorting with quicksort:

**Divide**: Partition (rearrange) the array _A_\[_p_.._r_] into two (possibly empty) subarrays _A_\[_p_.._q_ - 1] and _A_\[_q_ + 1.._r_] such that each element of _A_\[_p_.._q_ - 1] is less than or equal to _A_\[_q_], which is, in turn, less than or equal to each element of _A_\[_q_ + 1.._r_].
Compute the index _q_ as part of this partitioning procedure.

**Conquer**: Sort the two subarrays _A_\[_p_.._q_ - 1] and _A_\[_q + 1_.._r_] by recursive calls to quicksort.

**Combine**: Because the subarrays are already sorted, no work is needed to combine them: the entire array _A_\[_p_.._r_] is now sorted.  

As for the algorithm:

**Input**: A sequence of _n_ numbers \<_a_<sub>1</sub>, _a_<sub>2</sub>, ..., _a_<sub>n</sub>\>.

**Output**: A permutation (reordering) \<_a'_<sub>1</sub>, _a'_<sub>2</sub>, ..., _a'_<sub>_n_</sub>\> of the input sequence such that _a'_<sub>1</sub> ≤ _a'_<sub>2</sub> ≤ ... ≤ _a'_<sub>_n_</sub>.


**Pseudocode**:
>Quicksort(_A_, _p_, _r_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _p_ < _r_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _q_ = Partition(_A_, _p_, _r_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        Quicksort(_A_, _p_, _q_ -1)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        Quicksort(_A_, _q_ + 1, _r_)  

>Partition(_A_, _p_, _r_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _x_ = _A_\[_r_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _i_ = _p_ - 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _j_ = _p_ **to** _r_ - 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **if** _A_\[_j_] ≤ _x_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;            _i_ = _i_ + 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;            exchange _A_\[_i_] with _A_\[_j_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    exchange _A_\[_i_ + 1] with _A_\[_r_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _i_ + 1  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter07/Quicksort.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter07/QuicksortTest.kt).

### Randomized Quicksort

In exploring the average-case behavior of quicksort, we have made an assumption that all permutations of the input numbers are equally likely. 
In an engineering situation, however, we cannot always expect this assumption to hold.
As in chapter 5, we can use randomization in order to get a good expected performance over all inputs.
Permuting the input would be a possibility, but in quicksort we can use a simpler technique, called *random sampling*.
We can randomly sample the range _p_.._r_, and with that ensure the pivot is equally likely to be any of elements of the subarray.

**Pseudocode**:
>Randomized-Quicksort(_A_, _p_, _r_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _p_ < _r_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _q_ = Randomized-Partition(_A_, _p_, _r_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        Randomized-Quicksort(_A_, _p_, _q_ -1)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        Randomized-Quicksort(_A_, _q_ + 1, _r_)  

>Randomized-Partition(_A_, _p_, _r_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _i_ = Random(_p_, _r_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    exchange _A_\[_r_] with _A_\[_i_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** Partition(_A_, _p_, _r_)  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter07/Quicksort.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter07/QuicksortTest.kt).
