Chapter 8. Sorting in Linear Time
=================================

Until this point, multiple algorithms were introduced that can sort _n_ numbers in _O_(_n_ lg _n_) time.
These algorithms share an interesting property: _the sorted order they determine is based only on comparisons between the input elements_.
Such algorithms are called **_comparison sorts_**, and all algorithms introduced so far are comparison sorts.

This chapter will introduce three new sorting algorithms: counting sort, radix sort and bucket sort - that run in linear time.
These algorithms use operations other than comparisons to determine the sorted order.

## Counting sort

**_Counting sort_** assumes that each of the _n_ input elements is an integer in the range 0 to _k_, for some integer _k_.  

Counting sort determines, for each input element _x_, the number of elements less than _x_.
It uses this information to place element _x_ directly into its position in the output array.

In the code for counting sort, we assume that the input is an array _A_\[1.._n_], and thus _A_._length_ = _n_.
We require two other arrays: the array _B_\[1.._n_] holds the sorted output, and the array _C_\[1.._k_] provides temporary working storage.


**Pseudocode**:
>Counting-Sort(_A_, _B_, _k_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    let _C_\[0.._k_] be an array  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _k_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _C_\[_i_] = 0  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _j_ = 1 **to** _A_._length_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _C_\[_A_\[_j_]] = _C_\[_A_\[_j_]] + 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    // _C_\[_i_] now contains the number of elements equal to _i_.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _k_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _C_\[_i_] = _C_\[_i_] + _C_\[_i_ - 1]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    // _C_\[_i_] now contains the number of elements less than or equal to _i_.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _j_ = _A_._length_ **downto** 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _B_\[_C_\[_A_\[_j_]]] = _A_\[_j_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _C_\[_A_\[_j_]] = _C_\[_A_\[_j_]] - 1  


**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter08/CountingSort.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter08/CountingSortTest.kt).

### Using Counting Sort to count numbers within a range

The exercise 8.2-4 asks the reader to provide an algorithm that, given _n_ integers in the range 0 to _k_, preprocesses its input and then answers a query about how many of the _n_ integers fall into a range \[_a_.._b_] in _O_\(1) time. 
And that the algorithm should use _θ_(_n_ + _k_) preprocessing time.

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter08/CountingSortRange.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter08/CountingSortRangeTest.kt).

## Radix Sort

This is the algorithm used by the card-sorting machines we now find in computer museums.
The cards have 80 columns, and in each column a machine can punch a hole in one of 12 places in the cards.
The sorter can be mechanically "programmed" to examine each given column, and distribute the cards in each of 12 bins depending on which place has been punched.

For decimal digits each column uses only 10 places. A _d_-digit number will then occupy a field of _d_ columns.

Radix sort solves the problem of card sorting, counterintuitively, by sorting on _least significant_ digit first, combining the cards into a single deck, with cards in the bin 0 preceding cards from bin 1, and so on.
Then sorts the entire deck on the second least significant digit in a similar manner.
The process continues until the cards have been sorted by all _d_ digits.
This means that the cards will be sorted after _d_ passes of the algorithm.

For radix sort to work properly the digit sorts need to be stable.


**Pseudocode**:
>Radix-Sort(_A_, _d_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _d_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        use a stable sort to sort array _A_ on digit _i_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter08/RadixSort.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter08/RadixSortTest.kt).

## Bucket Sort

Bucket Sort assumes that the input is drawn from an uniform distribution.
It divides the values into _n_ equal-sized subintervals, or *buckets*, and then distributes the _n_ input numbers into the buckets.
Since the input is uniformly and independently distributed, we don't expect many numbers to fall in each bucket.
To produce the output, we simply sort the numbers in each bucket, and then go through the buckets in order, listing the elements in each.

**Pseudocode**:
>Bucket-Sort(_A_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    let _B_\[0.._n_- 1] be a new array  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _n_ = _A_._length_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _n_ - 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        make _B_\[_i_] an empty list  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _n_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        insert _A_\[_i_] into list _B_\[⌊_n_ _A_\[_i_]⌋]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _n_ - 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        sort list _B_\[_i_] with insertion sort  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    concatenate the lists _B_\[0], _B_\[1], ..., _B_\[_n_ - 1] together in order  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter08/BucketSort.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter08/BucketSortTest.kt).
