Chapter 9. Medians and Order Statistics
=======================================

The _i_ th **order statistic** of a set of _n_ elements is the _i_ th smallest element.
For example, the **minimum** of a set of elements is the first order statistic (_i_ = 1), and the **maximum** is the _n_ th order statistic (_i_ = _n_).
A **median**, informally, is the "halfway point" of the set.
When _n_ is odd, the median is unique, occurring at _i_ = (_n_ + 1)/2.
When _n_ is even, there are two medians, occurring at _i_ = _n_/2 and _i_ = _n_/2 + 1.
Thus, regardless of the parity of _n_, medians occur at _i_ = ⌊(n + 1)/2⌋ (the **lower median**) and _i_ = ⌈(n + 1)/2⌉ (the **upper median**).

This chapter addresses the problem of selecting the _i_ th order statistic from a set of _n_ distinct numbers.

The **selection problem** is formally defined as:

**Input**: A set _A_ of _n_ (distinct) numbers and an integer _i_, with 1 ≤ _i_ ≤ _n_.

**Output**: The element _x_ ∈ _A_ that is larger than exactly _i_ - 1 other elements of A.


### Minimum

**Pseudocode**:
>Minimum(_A_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _min_ = _A_\[1]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **for** _i_ = 2 **to** _A_.length  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **if** _min_ > _A_\[_i_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;            _min_ = _A_\[_i_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _min_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter09/Minimum.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter09/MinimumTest.kt).

This algorithm is optimal in respect of the number of comparisons required, as we require _n_ - 1 comparisons to determine the minimum.
A similar algorithm can be used to determine the maximum.

### Randomized Select

The general selection problem appears more difficult than the simple problem of finding a minimum.
Yet, surprinsingly, the asymptotic running time for both problems is the same.
Here an algorithm is presented, that resembles Quicksort, and uses the Randomized-Partition introduced in Chapter 7.
Randomized-Select returns the _i_ th smallest element of the array _A_\[_p_.._r_].

**Pseudocode**:
>Randomized-Select(_A_, _p_, _r_, _i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;**if** _p_ == _r_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _A_\[_p_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_q_ = Randomized-Partition(_A_, _p_, _r_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;_k_ = _q_ - _p_ + 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;**if** _i_ == _k_ // the pivot value is the answer  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _A_\[_q_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;**elseif** _i_ < _k_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** Randomized-Select(_A_, _p_, _q_ - 1, _i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;**else** **return** Randomized-Select(_A_, _q_ + 1, _r_, _i_ - _k_)  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter09/RandomizedSelect.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter09/RandomizedSelectTest.kt).


