III. Data Structures
====================

This part of the book will introduce sets, and show that they are just as fundamental in computer science than they are in mathematics.
As opposed to mathematical sets though, these sets can be manipulated by algorithms. 
Such sets are called **dynamic**.

Sets that support operations for inserting, deleting and testing membership of elements are known as a **dictionary**.

In a typical dynamic set implementation, each element is represented by an object whose attributes can be inspected and manipulated.
Some kinds of sets assume that one of the object's attributes is an identifying **key**.
If the keys are all different, we can think of the set as a set of key values.
The set may contain **satellite data**, which are usually part of the objects being manipulated, but are otherwise completely ignored by the set implementation.

**Operations on dynamic sets** can be grouped into two categories: **queries**, which simply return information about the set, and **modifying operations**, which change the set.
Below is a list of typical operations.
Any specific application will usually require only a few of these to be implemented.

**Search(_S_, _k_)**  
    A query that, given a set _S_, and a key value _k_, returns a pointer _x_ to an element in _S_ such that _x.key_ = _k_, or _NIL_ if no such element belongs to _S_.
    
**Insert(_S_, _k_)**  
    A modifying operation that augments the set S with the element pointed to by _x_. 
    We usually assume that any attributes in element _x_ needed by the set implementation have already been initialized.

**Delete(_S_, _k_)**  
    A modifying operation that, given a pointer _x_ to an element in the set _S_, removes _x_ from _S_. 
    (Note that this operation takes a pointer to an element _x_, not a key value.)
    
**Minimum(_S_)**
    A query on a totally ordered set _S_ that returns a pointer to the element of _S_ with the smallest key.
    
**Maximum(_S_)**
    A query on a totally ordered set _S_ that returns a pointer to the element of _S_ with the largest key.
    
**Successor(_S_, _x_)**
    A query that, given an element _x_ whose key is from a totally ordered set _S_, returns a pointer to the next larger element in _S_, or _NIL_ if _x_ is the maximum element.

**Predecessor(_S_, _x_)**
    A query that, given an element _x_ whose key is from a totally ordered set _S_, returns a pointer to the next smaller element in _S_, or _NIL_ if _x_ is the minimum element.


[Chapter 10](3.10.md) presents the essentials of working with simple data structures such as stacks, queues, linked lists and rooted trees.

[Chapter 11](3.11.md) introduces hash tables.

[Chapter 12](3.12.md) introduces binary search trees.

[Chapter 13](3.13.md) introduces red-black-trees.

[Chapter 14](3.14.md) describes augmenting dadta structures, and includes an example implementation of interval trees.

