Chapter 10. Elementary Data Structures
======================================

This chapter examines the representation of dynamic sets by data structures that use pointers.
The most rudimentary data structures will be defined here: stacks, queues, linked lists and rooted trees.

## Stacks and queues

Stacks and queues are dynamic sets in which the element removed by the delete operation is prespecified.
In a **stack**, the element deleted from the set is the most recently inserted: the stack implements a **last-in, first-out** or **LIFO**, policy.
Similarly, in a **queue** the element deleted is the one present the longest time: the queue implements a **first-in, first-out**, or **FIFO**, policy.

### Stack

In a stack, the _INSERT_ operation is usually called _PUSH_; and the _DELETE_ operation, which does not take any element, is usually called _POP_.
These names are allusions to physical stacks.


**Pseudocode**:
>Stack-Empty(_S_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _S_._top_ == 0  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **return** TRUE  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **else return** FALSE  

>Push(_S_, _x_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _S_._top_ = _S_._top_ + 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _S_\[_S_._top_] = _x_  

>Pop(_S_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** Stack-Empty(_S_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **error** "underflow"  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **else** 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _S_._top_ = _S_._top_ - 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **return** _S_\[_S_._top_+ 1]  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter10/Stack.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter10/StackTest.kt).

### Queue

In a queue, the _INSERT_ operation is called _ENQUEUE_; and the _DELETE_ operation is called _DEQUEUE_.
The FIFO property of the queue causes it to operate like a line of customers waiting to pay.
A queue has a **head** and a **tail**. 
When an element is enqueued, it takes a place at the _tail_ of the queue. 
The element dequeued is always the one at the _head_ of the queue. 


**Pseudocode**:
>Enqueue(_Q_, _x_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _Q_.\[_Q_._tail_] = _x_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _Q_._tail_ == _Q_._length_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _Q_._tail_ = 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **else** _Q_._tail_ = _Q_._tail_ + 1  

>Dequeue(_Q_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _x_ = _Q_\[_Q_._head_]  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _Q_._head_ == _Q_._length_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _Q_._head_ = 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **else** _Q_._head_ = _Q_._head_ + 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _x_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter10/Queue.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter10/QueueTest.kt).

### Linked List

A linked list is a data structure in which the objects are arranged in linear order.
Unlike an array, its order is not determined by an index, but by a pointer in each object.
Each element of a _**doubly linked list**_ _L_ is an object with an attribute _key_ and two other pointer attributes: _next_ and _prev_.
The object may also contain other satellite data.

A list may have several forms.
It may be singly linked or doubly linked, it may be sorted or not, and it may be circular or not.
If a list is _**single linked**_, we omit the _prev_ pointer in each element.
If a list is _**sorted**_, the linear order of the list corresponds to the linear order of keys stored in elements of the list; the minimum element is the head, and the maximum element is the tail.
If the list is _**unsorted**_, the elements can appear in any order.
In a _**circular**_ list, the _prev_ pointer of the head of the list points to the tail, and the _next_ pointer of the tail points to the head.

**Pseudocode**:
>List-Search(_L_, _k_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _x_ = _L_._head_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **while** _x_ ≠ NIL and _x_._key_ ≠ _k_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _x_ = _x_._next_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _x_  

>List-Insert(_L_, _x_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _x_._next_ = _L_._head_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _L_._head_ ≠ NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _L_._head_._prev_= _x_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _L_._head_ = _x_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _x_._prev_ = NIL  

>List-Delete(_L_, _x_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _x_._prev_ ≠ NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _x_._prev_._next_ = _x_._next_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **else** _L_._head_ = _x_._next_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _x_._next_ ≠ NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _x_._next_._prev_ = _x_._prev_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter10/LinkedList.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter10/LinkedListTest.kt).

The code for List-Delete can be made simpler with the use of **sentinels**. 
A **sentinel** is a dummy object that allows us to simplify the code by ignoring the boundary conditions at the head and tail of the list.
Wherever we have a reference to NIL in list code, we replace it by a reference to _L_._nil_.
This change turns a regular doubly linked list into a **circular, doubly linked list with a sentinel**, in which the sentinel _L_._nil_ lies between the head and tail.
The attribute _L_._nil_._next_ points to the head of the list, and _L_._nil_._prev_ points to the tail.
Since _L_._nil_._next_ points to the head, we can eliminate the attribute _L_._head_ altogether, replacing its references by _L_._nil_._next_.

## Representing rooted trees

In this section, we look specifically at the problem of representing rooted trees by linked data structures.
First looking at binary trees, and then a method is presented for rooted trees in which a node can have an arbitrary number of children.

Each node is represented by an object, and we assume that each node contains a _key_ attribute.
The remaining attributes of interest are pointers to other nodes, and they vary according to the type of tree.

### Binary trees

Binary trees may be represented by the attributes _p_, _left_, _right_, where they would store pointers to the parent, left child and right child nodes respectively.

### Rooted trees with unbounded branching

We can extend the scheme for representing a binary tree to any class of trees in which the number of children of each node is at most some constant _k_: 
we replace the _left_ and _right_ attributes by _child<sub>1</sub>_, _child<sub>2</sub>_, ..., _child<sub>k</sub>_.
This scheme no longer works when the number of children in the node is unbounded, since we do not know how many attributes to allocate in advance.
Moreover, even if the number of children _k_ is bounded by a large constant but most nodes have a small number of children, we may waste a lot of memory.

Fortunately there is a clever scheme to represent such trees. And it has the advantage of using only _O_(_n_) space for any _n_-node rooted tree.
In the _**left-child, right-sibling representation**_, like before, the node has a pointer to its parent _p_. 
Instead of having a pointer to each of is children, however, each node _x_ has only two pointers:
1. _x_._left-child_ points to the leftmost child of node _x_, and
2. _x_._right-sibling_ points to the sibling of _x_ immediately to its right.

### Other tree representations

We sometimes represent trees in other ways. 
Chapters [6](6.00.md) and [21](21.md) display other schemes to represent trees.
Which scheme is best depends on the application.



