Chapter 12. Binary Search Trees
===============================

The search tree data structure supports many dynamic-set operations, including _SEARCH_, _MINIMUM_, _MAXIMUM_, _PREDECESSOR_, _SUCCESSOR_, _INSERT_ and _DELETE_.
Thus, we can use a search tree both as a dictionary and as a priority queue.

Basic operations on the three take time proportional to the height of the tree.
For a complete binary tree with _n_ nodes, such operations run in _Θ_(lg _n_) worst-case time.
If the tree is a linear chain of _n_ nodes though, the same operations take _Θ_(_n_) worst-case time.

We can build some variations of a binary tree that keep the tree balanced, guaranteeing _Θ_(lg _n_) worst-case time for most operations.

### What is a binary search tree?

A binary search tree is organized, as the name suggests, in a binary tree.
We can present such a tree by a linked data structure in which each node is an object.
In addition to a _key_ and satellite data, each node contains attributes _left_, _right_ and _p_ that point to the nodes corresponding to its left child, its right child, and its parent, respectively.
If a child or the parent is missing, the attribute contains NIL.
The root node is the only one in the tree whose parent is NIL.

The keys in a binary search tree are always stored in such a way as to satisfy the _**binary-search-tree property**_:
>Let _x_ be a node in a binary search tree. If _y_ is a node in the let subtree of _x_, then _y_._key_ ≤ _x_._key_. If _y_ is a node in the right subtree of _x_, then _y_._key_ ≥ _x_._key_.

The binary-search-tree property allows us to print out all the keys in a binary search tree in sorted order by a simple recursive algorithm, called an _**inorder tree walk**_.
This algorithm is so named because it prints the key of the root of a subtree between printing the values in its left subtree and printing those in its right subtree.
Similarly, a _**preorder tree walk**_ prints the root before the values in either subtree, and a _**postorder tree walk**_ prints the root after the values in its subtrees.

**Pseudocode**:
>Inorder-Tree-Walk(_x_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _x_ ≠ NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        Inorder-Tree-Walk(_x_._left_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        print _x_._key_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        Inorder-Tree-Walk(_x_._right_)  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter12/TreeWalk.kt)

### Querying a binary search tree

We often need to search for a key stored in a binary search tree.
Besides the SEARCH operation, binary search trees can support such queries as MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, SUCCESSOR, and PREDECESSOR.

Searching begins at the root, and traces a simple path downward in the tree.
For each node _x_ it encounters, it compares its value with the key _k_, deciding whether the search is over, or if it should move to the left or right child.

**Pseudocode**:
>Tree-Search(_x_, _k_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _x_ == NIL or _k_ == _x_._key_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **return** _x_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _k_ < _x_._key_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **return** Tree-Search(_x_._left_, _k_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **else** **return** Tree-Search(_x_._right_, _k_)  

>Iterative-Tree-Search(_x_, _k_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **while** _x_ ≠ NIL and _k_ ≠ _x_._key_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **if** _k_ < _x_._key_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;            _x_ = _x_._left_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **else** _x_ = _x_._right_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _x_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTree.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTreeTest.kt)

### Minimum and maximum

We can always find a minimum in a binary tree by following the _left_ child pointers from the root until we reach a NIL node.

**Pseudocode**:
>Tree-Minimum(_x_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **while** _x_._left_ ≠ NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _x_ = _x_._left_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _x_  

>Tree-Maximum(_x_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **while** _x_._right_ ≠ NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _x_ = _x_._right_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _x_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTree.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTreeTest.kt)

Both of these procedures run in _O_(_h_) time on a tree of height _h_.

### Successor and predecessor

Given a node in a binary search tree, sometimes we need to find its successor in the sorted order determined by an inorder tree walk.
If all keys are distinct, the successor of a node _x_ is the node with the smallest key greater than _x_._key_.
The structure of a binary tree allows us to identify the successor without doing any comparison.

**Pseudocode**:
>Tree-Successor(_x_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _x_._right_ ≠ NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **return** Tree-Minimum(_x_._right_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _y_ = _x_._p_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **while** _y_ ≠ NIL and _x_ == _y_._right_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _x_ = _y_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _y_ = _y_._p_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _y_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTree.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTreeTest.kt)

## Insertion and deletion

The operations of insertion and deletion cause the dynamic set represented by a binary search tree to change.
The data structure must be modified to reflect this change, but in such a way that the binary-search-tree property continues to hold.

### Insertion

To insert a new value _v_ into a binary search tree _T_, we take a node _z_ for which _z_._key_ = _v_, _z_._left_ = NIL, and _z_._right_ = NIL.
It modifies _T_ and some of the attributes of _z_ in such a way that it inserts _z_ into an appropriate position in the tree.

**Pseudocode**:
>Tree-Insert(_T_, _z_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _y_ = NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _x_ = _T_._root_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **while** _x_ ≠ NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _y_ = _x_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **if** _z_._key_ < _x_._key_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;            _x_ = _x_._left_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **else** _x_ = _x_._right_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _z_._p_ = _y_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _y_ == NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _T_._root_ = _z_ // tree T was empty  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **elseif** _z_._key_ < _y_._key_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _y_._left_ = _z_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **else** _y_._right_ = _z_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTree.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTreeTest.kt)

### Deletion

The overall strategy for deleting a node _z_ from a binary search tree _T_ has three basic cases, but one of them is a bit tricky.
* If _z_ has no children, then we simply remove it by modifying its parent to replace _z_ with NIL as its child.
* If _z_ has just one child, then we elevate that child to take _z_’s position in the tree by modifying _z_’s parent to replace _z_ by _z_’s child.
* If _z_ has two children, then we find _z_’s successor _y_ - which must be in _z_’s right subtree - and have _y_ take _z_’s position in the tree.
The rest of _z_’s original right subtree becomes _y_’s new right subtree, and _z_’s left subtree becomes _y_’s new left subtree.
This case is the tricky one because it matters whether _y_ is _z_’s right child.

In order to move subtrees around within the binary search tree, we define a subroutine TRANSPLANT, which replaces one subtree as a child of its parent with another subtree.
When TRANSPLANT replaces the subtree rooted at node _u_ with the subtree rooted at node _v_, node _u_’s parent becomes node _v_’s parent, and _u_’s parent ends up having _v_ as its appropriate child.

**Pseudocode**:
>Transplant(_T_, _u_, _v_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _u_._p_ == NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _T_._root_ = _v_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **elseif** _u_ == _u_._p_._left_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _u_._p_._left_ = _v_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **else** _u_._p_._right_ = _v_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _v_ ≠ NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _v_._p_ = _u_._p_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTree.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTreeTest.kt)

With the TRANSPLANT procedure in hand, here is the procedure that deletes node _z_ from binary search tree _T_:

**Pseudocode**:
>Tree-Delete(_T_, _z_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _z_._left_ == NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        TRANSPLANT(_T_, _z_, _z_._right_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **elseif** _z_._right_ == NIL  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        TRANSPLANT(_T_, _z_, _z_._left_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **else** _y_ = Tree-Minimum(_z_._right_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **if** _y_._p_ ≠ _z_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;            TRANSPLANT(_T_, _y_, _y_._right_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;            _y_._right_ = _z_._right_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;            _y_._right_._p_ = _y_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        TRANSPLANT(_T_, _z_, _y_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _y_._left_ = _z_._left_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _y_._left_._p_ = _y_  


**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTree.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter12/BinarySearchTreeTest.kt)

