Chapter 14. Augmenting Data Structures
======================================

Some engineering situations require no more than a "textbook" data structure, but many others require a bit of creativity.
Only in rare situations will you need to create an entirely new type of data structure though.
More often, it will be suffice to augment aa textbook data structure by storing additional information in it.
It is not always simple though, since the added information must be updated and maintained by the ordinary operations on the data structure.

### Dynamic order statistics
[Chapter 9][chapter9] introduced the notion of an order statistic.
Specifically, the _i_ th order statistic of a set of _n_ elements, where _i_ ∈ {1, 2, ..., _n_}, is simply the element in the set with the _i_th smallest key.
In this section, we will see how to modify red-black trees so that we can determine any order statistic for a dynamic set in _O_(lg _n_) time.
We shall see how to compute the **_rank_** of an element - its position in the linear order of the set - in _O_(lg _n_) time.

An **order-statistic tree** _T_ is simply a red-black tree with additional information stored in each node. 
Besides the usual red-black tree attributes _x_._key_, _x_._color_, _x_._p_, _x_._left_, and _x_._right_ in a node _x_, we have another attribute _x_._size_.
This attribute contains the number of (internal) nodes in the subtree rooted at _x_ (including _x_ itself), that is, the size of the subtree.
If we define the size of the sentinel to be 0 (that is, _T_._nil_._size_ to be 0), then we have the identity:

>_x_._size_ = _x_._left_._size_ + _x_._right_._size_ + 1

We do not require keys to be distinct in an order-statistic tree.
In the presence of equal keys, the above notion is not well defined.
We remove this ambiguity for an order-statistic tree by defining the rank of an element as the position at which it would be printed in an inorder walk of the tree.

#### Retrieving an element with a given rank

First, let's examine the implementation of two order-statistic queries that use this additional information.
We begin with an operation that retrieves an element with a given rank.
The procedure OS-Select(_x_, _i_) returns a pointer to the node containing the _i_ th smallest key in the subtree rooted at _x_.
To find the node with the _i_ th smallest key in an order-statistic tree _T_, we call OS-Select(_T_._root_, _i_).

**Pseudocode**:
>OS-Select(_x_, _i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _r_ = _x_._left_._size_ + 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **if** _i_ = _r_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **return** _x_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **elseif** _i_ < _r_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **return** OS-Select(_x_._left_, _i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** OS-Select(_x_._right_, _i_ - _r_)  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter14/OrderStatisticTree.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter14/OrderStatisticTreeTest.kt).

Because each recursive call goes down one level in the order-statistic tree, the total time for OS-Select is at worst proportional to the height of the tree.
Since the tree is a red-black tree, its height is _O_(lg _n_), where _n_ is the number of nodes.
Thus the running time of OS-Select is _O_(lg _n_) for a dynamic set of _n_ elements.

#### Determining the rank of an element

Given a pointer to a node _x_ in an order-statistic tree _T_, the procedure OS-Rank returns the position of _x_ in the linear order determined by an inorder tree walk of _T_.

**Pseudocode**:
>OS-Rank(_T_, _x_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _r_ = _x_._left_._size_ + 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _y_ = _x_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **while** _y_ ≠ _T_._root_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **if** _y_ == _y_._p_._right_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;            _r_ = _r_ + _y_._p_._left_._size_ + 1  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        _y_ == _y_._p_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _r_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter14/OrderStatisticTree.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter14/OrderStatisticTreeTest.kt).

Since each iteration of the while loop takes _O_(1) time, and _y_ goes up one level in the tree with each iteration, the running time of OS-Rank is at worst proportional to the height of the tree: _O_(lg _n_) on an _n_-node order-statistic tree.

#### Maintaining subtree sizes

Given the _size_ attribute in each node, OS-Select and OS-Rank can quickly compute order-statistic information.
But unless we can efficiently maintain these attributes within the basic modifying operations on red-black trees, our work will have been for naught.
We shall now show how to maintain subtree sizes for both insertion and deletion without affecting the asymptotic running time of either operation.

Insertion into a red-black tree consists of two phases.
The first phase goes down the tree from the root, inserting the new node as a child of an existing node.
The second phase goes up the tree, changing colors and performing rotations to maintain the red-black properties.

To maintain the subtree sizes in the first phase, we simply increment _x_._size_ for each node _x_ on the simple path traversed from the root down toward the leaves.
The new node added gets a _size_ of 1.
Since there are _O_(lg _n_) nodes on the traversed path, the additional cost of maintaining the _size_ attributes is _O_(lg _n_).

In the second phase, the only structural changes to the underlying red-black tree are caused by rotations, of which there are at most two.
Moreover, a rotation is a local operation: only two nodes have their _size_ invalidated.
Referring to the code in [Chapter 13][chapter13] for Left-Rotate(_T_, _x_), we add the following lines:

>Left-Rotate(_T_, _x_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    ...  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _y_._size_ = _x_._size_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    _x_._size_ = _x_._left_._size_ + _x_._right_._size_ + 1  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter14/OrderStatisticTree.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter14/OrderStatisticTreeTest.kt).

The change to Right-Rotate is symmetric.

Since at most two rotations are performed during insertion, we spend only _O_(1) additional time updating _size_ attributes in the second phase.
Thus, the total time for insertion into an _n_-node order-statistic tree is _O_(lg _n_), which is asymptotically the same as s for an ordinary red-black tree.

Deletion from a red-black tree also consists of two phases: the first operates on the underlying search tree, and the second causes at most three rotations and otherwise performs no structural changes.
The first phase either removes the node _y_ from the tree or moves upward it within the tree.
To update the subtree sizes, we simply traverse a simple path from node _y_ (starting from its original position within the tree) up to the root, decrementing the _size_ attribute of each node on the path.
Since this path has length _O_(lg _n_) in an _n_-node red-black tree, the additional time spent maintaining _size_ attributes in the first phase is _O_(lg _n_).
We handle the _O_(1) rotations in the second phase of deletion in the same manner as for insertion.
Thus, both insertion and deletion, including maintaining the _size_ attributes, take _O_(lg _n_) time for n _n_-node order-statistic tree.

## How to augment a data structure

The process of augmenting a basic data structure to support additional functionality happens frequently in algorithm design.

We can break up the process of augmenting data structures into four steps:

1. Choose an underlying data structure.
2. Determine additional information to maintain in the underlying data structure.
3. Verify that we can maintain the additional information for the basic modifying operations on the underlying data structure.
4. Develop new operations.

As with any prescriptive design method, we should not blindly follow the steps in the order given.
Most work on design will contain elements of trial and error, and some steps might be followed in parallel.
Nevertheless, this four-step method provides a good focus for our efforts in augmenting a data structure.

## Interval trees

In this section, we shall augment red-black trees to support operations on dynamic  sets of intervals.
A **_Closed interval_** is an ordered pair of real numbers \[_t_<sub>1</sub>, _t_<sub>2</sub>], with _t_<sub>1</sub> ≤ _t_<sub>2</sub>.
The interval \[_t_<sub>1</sub>, _t_<sub>2</sub>] represents the set {_t_ ∈ ℝ : _t_<sub>1</sub> ≤ _t_ ≤ _t_<sub>2</sub>}.
**_Open_** and **_half-open_** intervals omit both or one of the endpoints from the set, respectively.
In this section we shall assume that intervals are closed; extending the results to open and half-open intervals is conceptually straightforward.

Intervals are convenient for representing events that each occupy a continuous period of time.
We might, for example, wish to query a database of time intervals to find out which events occurred during a given interval.
The data structure in this section provides an efficient way of maintaining such an interval database.

We can represent an interval \[_t_<sub>1</sub>, _t_<sub>2</sub>] as an object _i_, with attributes _i_._low_ = _t_<sub>1</sub> (the **_low endpoint_**) and _i_._high_ = _t_<sub>2</sub> (the **_high endpoint_**).
We say that intervals _i_ and _i'_ overlap **_overlap_** if _i_ ∩ _i'_ ≠ 0, that is, if _i_._low_ ≤ _i'_._high_ and _i'_._low_ ≤ _i_._high_.
Any two intervals _i_ and _i'_ satisfy the **_interval trichotomy_**; that is, exactly one of the following three properties hold:

a. _i_ and _i'_ overlap,  
b. _i_ is to the left of _i'_ (i.e. _i_._high_ < _i'_._low_),  
c. _i_ is to the right of _i'_ (i.e. _i'_._high_ < _i_._low_),  

An **_interval tree_** is a red-black tree that maintains a dynamic set of elements, with each element _x_ containing an interval _x_._int_.
Interval trees support the following operations:

Interval-Insert(_T_, _x_) adds the element _x_, whose _int_ attribute is assumed to contain an interval, to the interval tree _T_.  
Interval-Delete(_T_, _x_) removes the element _x_ from the interval tree _T_.  
Interval-Search(_T_, _i_) returns a pointer to an element _x_ in the interval tree _T_ such that _x_._int_ overlaps interval _i_, or a pointer to the sentinel _T_._nil_ if no such element is in the set.

#### Step 1: Underlying data structure

We choose a red-black tree in which each node _x_ contains an interval _x_._int_ and the key of _x_ is the low point, _x_._int_._low_, of the interval.
Thus, an in order tree walk of the data structure lists the intervals in sorted order of low endpoint.

#### Step 2: Additional information

In addition to the intervals themselves, each node _x_ contains a value _x_._max_ which is the maximum value of any interval endpoint stored in the subtree rooted in _x_.

#### Step 3: Maintaining the information

We must verify that insertion and deletion take _O_(lg _n_) time on an interval tree of _n_ nodes.
We can determine _x_._max_ given interval _x_._int_ and the _max_ values of node _x_'s children:

_x_._max_ = max(_x_._int_._high_, _x_._left_._max_, _x_._right_._max_).

Thus, insertion and deletion run in _O_(lg _n_) time.
In fact, we can update _max_ attributes after a rotation in _O_(1) time.

#### Step 4: Developing new operations

The only new operation we need is Interval-Search(_T_, _i_), which finds a node in tree _T_ whose interval overlaps interval _i_.
If there is no such interval in the tree, the procedure returns a pointer to the sentinel _T_._nil_.

>Interval-Search(_T_, _i_)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **while** _x_ ≠ _T_._nil_ and _i_ does not overlap _x_._int_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **if** _x_._left_ ≠ _T_._nil_ and _x_._left_._max_ ≥ _i_._low_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;                _x_ = _x_._left_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;        **else** _x_ = _x_._right_  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    **return** _x_  

**In Kotlin**: [Implementation](../src/main/kotlin/chapter14/IntervalTree.kt) and [Tests](../src/test/kotlin/chapter14/IntervalTreeTest.kt).

The search for an interval that overlaps _i_ starts with _x_ at the root of the tree and proceeds downward.
It terminates when either it finds an overlapping interval, or it points to the sentinel _T_._nil_.
Since each iteration of the basic loop takes _O_(1) time, and since the height of an n-node red-black tree is _O_(lg _n_), the Interval-Search procedure takes _O_(lg _n_) time.

[chapter9]: ./2.09.md
[chapter13]: ./3.13.md